Gender and Race Comparison of 
2013 AP Computer Science 
Enrollment and Pass Rates

by Catherine Barton
Python for Data Analytics, CanCode Project 2
Fall/Winter 2022

	This project was created as part of an introductory Python for Data Analytics course presented by CanCode. My goal in this project was to graphically depict disparities in Advance Placement (AP) Computer Science (CS) enrollment and pass rates amongst genders and races using Python language and associated libraries. The data I employed was gathered by Barbara Ericson (Georgia Tech) from College Board data and made available on the data.world website as a CSV file: https://data.world/education/ap-cs-pass-rate-by-racegender/workspace/file?filename=pass_rate.csv. The code associated with this project can be found as a pynb file in github at the following address: https://github.com/catbart/CC_Python_final_project/blob/main/CHB__CanCode_PY_FP_2023.ipynb.
	While the College Board makes demographic data on students taking AP Exams available each year, I chose Barbara Ericson’s compilation because it included multiple years of both gender and race data in one file. For simplicity, I made certain assumptions in using the data, namely, that the number of students for any given category enrolled in an AP course was equivalent to the number of students in that category who took the AP Exam. Second, I assumed that total number of students was equivalent to the number of male students plus the number of female students; similarly, that students identified as Black, Hispanic, or neither of those categories, but did not identify as multiple categories. Except for comparisons over time of national trends, I used the most current year in the dataset, 2013, for comparing state data. 
	Figure 4 shows the number of male students taking AP CS is roughly four times that of females, despite the number of male and female students in U.S. high schools being approximately the same in 2013.1 While it is clear from Figure 9 that the number of Black and Hispanic students taking AP CS is substantially less (roughly one-eighth) than that of students who do not identify as Black of Hispanic, culling data to compare those statistics to the relative ratios of Blacks and Hispanics enrolled in U.S. High Schools is more difficult. However, as a rough estimate for comparative purposes, the US Dept of Education 2020 Public School Enrollment Data shows U.S. public school students were 28% Hispanic, and 15% Black, or a combined 43% of public-school students.2 (Forty-six percent of students were White.) Were these numbers representative of 2013 enrollment numbers, it would imply that roughly one-quarter of Blacks and Hispanics in U.S. public schools took AP CS.
      Figure 1 shows the number of AP CS courses offered in U.S. high schools (for which data is provided) was roughly one-fifth that of AP Calculus courses offered. One likely reason for such disparity is lack of demand by students, in part, driven by time limitations and a need to satisfy graduation requirements in core subject areas, which Calculus would fulfill. While the number of AP CS course offerings are substantially less than AP Calc course offerings, Figures 2 and 3 show course offerings of both have been increasing.  
      Female AP CS pass rates were, in general, consistently lower than the pass rates of all students (Figure 8), but by lower margins, which would lead one to explore overall causes. The histograms shown in Figures 5 and 6 were included to satisfy project criteria and are used to show the difference between female and all student pass rates. Male student pass rates would increase when female pass rates are removed from the data. Figure 11 shows Black and Hispanic AP CS pass rates were lower than all AP CS student pass rates, but with significant variability which might lead one to look at the individual demographics of schools offering AP CS. It should be noted that AP data comes from students in both private and public schools while much of the NCES data comes from public school data only.
      In 2017, in response to a shortage of women and students of color studying STEM and pursuing STEM careers, the College Board began offering a second AP CS course, AP CSP. 3 Along with initiatives to increase STEM initiatives, enrollment in AP CS courses has increased at a greater rate. 4 In 2020, Code.org published an in-depth study illuminating disparities in the State of Computer Science Education. The full report can be found at https://advocacy.code.org/2020_state_of_cs.pdf. Barbara Ericson (University of Michigan), from whose research the data for my project was garnered, has published research and blogs about disparities in Computer Science enrollment and STEM participation, much of which can be found at https://cs4all.home.blog/.
      The code writing portion of my project began with a review of available data and contemplation over what the data represented and how I wanted to present it using Python and the graphing capabilities of associated libraries. From there, I relied on syntax learned in class and additional coding methods found through internet research. To some extent, fine tuning graphical depictions was by experimentation, changing colors, size, position, etc.
      While I feel that I have met project requirements and successfully shown gender and racial disparities in AP CS enrollment, I feel my analysis is relatively insignificant and outdated, given the amount of current data that can be culled, ironically, from data captured and made available through the use of computer technology. As an example of areas of potential further exploration, Under-Represented Minority (URM) enrollment data would become more meaningful when compared with URM student populations, and, comparison with educational funding and STEM initiatives could help improve an understanding of pass rate influences. In addition, because The AP CS course offerings in California and Texas greatly outweigh offerings in other states, removing the data from those states in enrollment graphs would provide a better a better relative depiction of the remaining states. Likewise, removing pass rate data from states with extremely low enrollment numbers would help eliminate any outlying rates that might be skewed by reliance on small sample size.
1 World Bank, Ratio of Female to Male Secondary School Enrollment for the United States [SEENRSECOFMZSUSA], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/SEENRSECOFMZSUSA, January 17, 2023.
2 National Center for Education Statistics. (2022). Racial/Ethnic Enrollment in Public Schools. Condition of Education. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. Retrieved January 17, 2023, from https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/cge.
3 New Data: AP Computer Science Principles Course Bringing More Diverse Set of Students Into Computer Science Pipeline, December 9, 2020, COLLEGE BOARD, retrieved January 18, 2023, from  https://newsroom.collegeboard.org/new-data-ap-csp-course-bringing-more-diverse-set-students-computer-science-pipeline.
4 AP Computer Science Over Time, retrieved January 18, 2023 from https://code.org/promote/ap
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

